Hello everyone and welcome to this quick lecture on decomposition code along.
So we have already discussed theoretically what the competition is.
When you take a time series and separate its air its trend than seasonality components.
Now we're going to show you how you can quickly use stat's models to actually perform this python.
Let's open up into Jupiter notebook and get started.
OK here I am in my Jupiter notebook and I zoom in one more level here and then we'll start off with
a couple of imports will import Pansy's PD and then also import that plot live thought pipe plot as
Piazzi.
And then I will set my plot lib in line great.
So we're going to be working at that same airline data we had earlier.
We're going to read the C S V n we'll say airline passengers at cxxviii and I will specify that the
next column is going to be the month and whips and make sure it's read cxxviii not read c.a.p.
There we go.
And if we take a look at the head of the airline data again we have something that looks like this.
So we're going to do now is use it us so we can actually use some sort of additive model when it seems
that the trend is more linear and the seasonality and trend components seem to be constant over time.
So if we actually take a look at this plot
airline plot it out I can see that there's looks like there are some seasonality to it.
And then there's also a general trend in the opposite direction.
So based on this chart it looks like the trend in these earlier days is slightly increasing at a higher
rate than just linear.
So I'm trying to figure out is is this just a linear trend or maybe it's like the exponential trend.
It's a little hard to tell from this plot.
So it would be nice if we can use it to decompose this that way can analyze just the trend part itself
and then analyze just the seasonal part itself.
So we're going to do is get this in the correct format first we'll say airline we're going to drop any
missing values here.
Say in places equal to true.
And I'm also going to reset the index to be a time series index or say PD to date time and we actually
did this in the very previous lecture an average checkout my airline the head of it I see that I have
the day there.
So it's clearly a day time index.
So in order to actually do that decomposition it's actually quite simple.
You'll say from stats models the TSA seasonal import seasonal decompose.
Then once you've imported that all you have to do is say result is equal to seasonal underscore.
Decompose the function we just imported and we end up doing as you passen the column that you or series
really that you want to decompose in this case is thousands of passengers.
And if we take a look at this function seasonally compose there's different models we can use we can
use an additive model or a multiplicative model.
So you come down here and it says model what type of seasonal component do you want.
So the different ones you can use are either multiplicative or an additive model in order to choose
the correct one.
You may need to kind of guess and check here.
But hopefully you can kind of tell from here that this looks to be more than just linear so a linear
line would probably be a little flatter than this towards the high end.
And one simple way to do this is if you kind of with your eyes look at the peaks of the actual seasonality
points you can see that this seems to be more than just linear.
It seems to be almost like some sort of exponential or some sort of multiplicative growth here so it's
more than just linear growth in which case will end up saying that the model we want using here is multiplicative.
If the trend looks more linear then you can add the additive model.
So if we take a look at the result what we have here we have this decompose result.
Then if you hit tab there's a few methods you can do off of it so you can actually get back something
like the seasonal component and will give you the seasonal component itself which you can then plot
and you can see just the seasonal component of the data.
If you want to just the trend you can plot out the trend and that gives you just the trend portion of
the data and you can see here that since the data is pretty early.
If we did an additive model and ran that and checked that the trend it's pretty much is going to give
you the exact same thing.
So in our case switching the trend are additive and have that can actually make a big difference because
it's kind of on the verge of both of them.
You could see it kind of either way whether it's linear or some sort of a higher growth.
In other cases it's going to be a lot more obvious if it's kind of exponential growth or if it's straight
linear earth here it's almost in the middle between both really either one would probably work fine
as you can see kind of almost the exact same results when we were plotting these out.
So then we we're going to do is if you want to see everything compare together you just say that plot
and you end up seeing the results.
Now a quick note here.
If you just say result of plot you Jupiter notebook sometimes only in the notebook you get these dual
plots.
These are the exact same thing.
In order to not have that you can just set this equal to something like Fig is equal to result that
plot and then you only see one plot here.
So this is the way we can use it as the composition.
This allows us to kind of learn more about our data what the observed values are what the general trend
looks like.
You can kind of mess around with an additive model over some old model.
In our case it's kind of the same way for either of these methods.
And then we have the seasonal portion which is nice we can break that down.
Analyze the seasonality of it and then we can also get the residual which is basically the part that's
not explained by the trend or the seasonal components.
That's our remaining error here.
OK.
That's the very basics of how to use it.
Yes with Python.
We're going to be diving into this whole analysis of a time series and a lot more detail when we talk
about Arema models and seasonal Arema models.
But before we actually dive into coding those we explain what they are how they work and why they may
or may not be a good choice for financial datasets.
Thanks everyone and I'll see you at the next lecture where we begin our discussion on ARIMA models.